for the next 15 min: explores potential technologies of emergence in open video production. For the first time, html5 enables collaborative multimedia editing to occur within a networked, wiki platform.

Our project puts this line of inquiry into practice with the design of a platform for collaborative videos, or ‘memes’. This platform, called memetec1 is an editor and a video hosting system designed to encourage multiple remixes and annotation. Memetec’s decentralized repository is for creative use and built with a distributed pool of media, in a federation of servers for hosting both raw media and metadata. The repository is composed of any digital media that the user controls, be it a blog posting, a torrent, an archive.org item, videos, wireframes and surface maps, vector graphics, items on a diaspora seedbox, or any other technology that presents methods for artful manipulation. The free-software, open-source, wiki-based platform lets users invite other participants to join in dialogic creative expression, by jointly remixing, cutting, trimming, annotating and overlaying text and transitions into a collaborative project that record the processes of its construction. Through the exchange and remix of its memes, the repository becomes an emergent gesture, an alternate canon and a community. 

Such an interface raises several interesting questions. For one, the digital format allows continuous reprocessing; digital items remain in an unclear state – is a text ever finished? This instability could appear either as a threat or a chance to make materials publicly available to be worked upon and to track their social trajectories. For example, cultural material can be enriched when placed in new contexts to give a more complete story; objects become capable of unforeseen mutations, manglings and interpretations. In open databases, media disrupt teleological logic and instead present “the world as a list of items”2 that refuses to be ordered toward any intended outcome. How could these actions generate new methods for open-ended collaborative production, for dethroning the idea of single authorship in favor of an aggregate that is always larger than the sum of its parts?

We should also ask what type of content would be suitable for this platform and for html5 video embedding in general. Could the collaborative interface facilitate complex, fictional narratives by multiple editors, entailing divergent ‘endings’ (imagine the appeal to fan-editing communities) or perhaps support memory archives for communities that have undergone traumatic events? Could we use a text, a poem or manifesto as the kernel or impetus for a project, around which videos collect as dynamic, image-based marginalia and motion picture tags? Could cultural institutions use this platform to encourage the public to interact with their archived content? To this end we will seek participants from within the Academy, by hosting screenings and participatory media workshops, as well as from abroad, by tapping into international networks beyond the Academie’s community: programmers, designers, filmmakers, cultural archives, and any one else interested in devising what types of expression this platform could support.

Another question derives from our position that, beyond technical constraints of html5, the design of an editing system plays a crucial role in the outcome generated by the behaviors of its users.  We consider it critical to ask how front-end design of software and website functionalities inform the possibilities suggested by new markup and wiki enabled features. What user-friendly interfaces could work best to encourage mass participation, and how will they shape the outcome of a project?

One example of a design that could encourage participation is our concept of the 'anti-master.' The anti-master exploits the potential for machine algorithms to construct new, unanticipated formations - we think of Katherine Hayles’ possibility space or Manuel DeLanda’s synthetic reason, of emergent socio-technical phenomena that cannot be foreseen by component parts alone. A possibility space is no longer a passive database, or even a collective platform of human edits, but an emergent, open-ended process of human-machine manipulations.  

For this reason, one aspect of our repository could be an automated collective edit compiled from the segmented differences of editors engaging the same idea and gauged by viewer attention. The anti-master is an evolving object that presents the viewing audience with subtly different versions of the same idea, and compiles a version of that idea based on edits that receive more complete views.  The anti-master is therefore formed by both gleaning the edit room floor and culling the viewed experience; it is a game that moves fast and encourages people to work together. It questions authorship as an act of individual, even uniquely human expression, by exposing the extent that art builds upon other artworks and technicities. 

Yet this project still raises several more questions. How might we develop classification systems and ontologies to organize versions of these emergent projects? Are attention metrics even appropriate for determining the anti-master? What other ways can we merge our ideas on a global and personal scale? How might our processes of communication be streamlined into outcomes of satisfactory quality or for a specific community’s uses? 

Finally, by making variability and play its operating principles, the project also hopes to advance alternate licensing tools to support the unfettered circulation and collective creation of cultural production. How might we use the project to discuss open access content in general, and economics of scarcity that limit creative expression and cultural exchange? How can it emphasize the use and development of open-source applications and open linked data by offering its objects to a future of potential, unforeseeable dispersal and re-use? How can the underlying technologies of open access create certain outcomes and trigger entirely unforeseen developments that have not yet received articulation?


